Create Smithy-CLI installation guide (#1697)
awslabs/smithy: docs/source-2.0/guides/smithy-cli/cli_installation.rst

.. _cli_installation:

.. |release-uri| replace:: https://github.com/awslabs/smithy/releases/download/__smithy_version__
.. |mac-tar| replace:: smithy-cli-darwin-x86_64.tar.gz
.. |mac-arm-tar| replace:: smithy-cli-darwin-aarch64.tar.gz
.. |linux-tar| replace:: smithy-cli-linux-x86_64.tar.gz
.. |linux-arm-tar| replace:: smithy-cli-linux-aarch64.tar.gz
.. |windows-tar| replace:: smithy-cli-windows-x64.tar.gz
.. |install-note| replace::
        If you've already installed the CLI and want to update to the
        latest version, you can use the ``--update`` flag.
        You may also choose where to install the CLI - for more information,
        run the installer using the ``--help`` flag.
.. |smithy-pub-key-uri| replace:: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/awslabs/smithy/main/smithy.asc

============
Installation
============

> The Smithy CLI is supported on a handful of different platforms:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Smithy CLI is supported on the following platforms:
```

- MacOS (x86, ARM)
- Linux (x86, ARM)
- Windows (x64)

> For more information on the latest releases of the Smithy CLI, see the official `Smithy GitHub releases`_ page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Releases of the Smithy CLI can be found on the `Smithy GitHub releases`_ page.
```

.. tab:: MacOS

    .. tab:: Homebrew

        You can get the CLI via Homebrew by first tapping into the official `AWS Homebrew Tap`_,
        and then installing the ``smithy-cli`` formula.

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh

            $ brew tap aws/tap && brew install smithy-cli

        After the install completes, you may run ``smithy --help`` to verify your installation.

    .. tab:: Manual (x86)

        First, retrieve the latest smithy installation from the `Smithy GitHub releases`_.

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh
            :substitutions:

            $ mkdir -p smithy-install/smithy &&
                curl -L |release-uri|/|mac-tar| -o smithy-install/|mac-tar| &&
                tar xvzf smithy-install/|mac-tar| -C smithy-install/smithy

        .. note::

>             If you'd like to verify the downloaded installation, work through :ref:`cli_verification` before proceeding.

Reviewer: nit - Can you wrap around 80 chars when possible to match the rest of the docs?

>         Now, run the installer(``install``) located in the newly created directory(``smithy-install/smithy``).

Reviewer 2: Probably better to spell this as `./install`.

        .. important:: The following command requires using ``sudo`` to install the CLI in the default

>             location (``/usr/local/smithy``). Alternatively, you may set your own install path, which should

Author: Part of the installation is creating a symlink in `/usr/local/bin`. If the link-dir (`/usr/local/bin` or whatever path they specify with `--bin-dir`) isn't in their path, an error is printed out.

            mitigate permissions issues when not running with ``sudo``.

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh

            $ sudo smithy-install/smithy/install

        .. note::
            |install-note|

        After the install completes, you may run ``smithy --help`` to verify your installation.

>         You may also delete all the files downloaded for the installation (``smithy-install/``).

Reviewer: I don't understand what this last sentence is saying and how the parenthetical relates

    .. tab:: Manual (ARM)

        First, retrieve the latest smithy installation from the `Smithy GitHub releases`_.

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh
            :substitutions:

            $ mkdir -p smithy-install/smithy &&
                curl -L |release-uri|/|mac-arm-tar| -o |mac-arm-tar| &&
                tar xvzf smithy-install/|mac-arm-tar| -C smithy-install/smithy

        .. note::

>             If you'd like to verify the downloaded installation, work through :ref:`cli_verification` before proceeding.

Reviewer: Can we do this as a seealso:: and say something like "Refer to X to verify the installation?"

>         Now, run the installer(``install``) located in the newly created directory(``smithy-install/smithy``).

Reviewer: missing spaces around parens. And isn't it `./install`?

>         .. important:: The following command requires using ``sudo`` to install the CLI in the default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        .. important:: The following command typically requires using ``sudo`` to install the CLI in the default
```

Reviewer: I think text is usually indented inside the `:: important::` admonition

            location (``/usr/local/smithy``). Alternatively, you may set your own install path, which should
            mitigate permissions issues when not running with ``sudo``.

        .. code-block:: sh

>             :caption: /bin/sh

Reviewer: We gotta get some tabs in here for nushell :)

            $ sudo smithy-install/smithy/install

        .. note::
            |install-note|

        After the install completes, you may run ``smithy --help`` to verify your installation.

>         You may also delete all the files downloaded for the installation (``smithy-install/``).

Reviewer: Same comment here as earlier I think -- I don't know what this is saying. Maybe instead of parens, say "You may also delete all the files downloaded for the installation at `smithy-install/`.

.. tab:: Linux

    .. tab:: Manual (x86)

        First, retrieve the latest smithy installation from the `Smithy GitHub releases`_.

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh
            :substitutions:

            $ mkdir -p smithy-install/smithy &&
                curl -L |release-uri|/|linux-tar| -o smithy-install/|linux-tar| &&
                tar xvzf smithy-install/|linux-tar| -C smithy-install/smithy

        .. note::
            If you'd like to verify the downloaded installation, work through :ref:`cli_verification` before proceeding.

        Now, run the installer(``install``) located in the newly created directory(``smithy-install/smithy``).

>         .. important:: The following command requires using ``sudo`` to install the CLI in the default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        .. important:: The following command typically requires using ``sudo`` to install the CLI in the default
```

            mitigate permissions issues when not running with ``sudo``.

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh

            $ sudo smithy-install/smithy/install

        .. note::
            |install-note|

        After the install completes, you may run ``smithy --help`` to verify your installation.
        You may also delete all the files downloaded for the installation (``smithy-install/``).

    .. tab:: Manual (ARM)

        First, retrieve the latest smithy installation from the `Smithy GitHub releases`_.

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh
            :substitutions:

            $ mkdir -p smithy-install/smithy &&
                curl -L |release-uri|/|linux-arm-tar| -o smithy-install/|linux-arm-tar| &&
                tar xvzf smithy-install/|linux-arm-tar| -C smithy-install/smithy

        .. note::
            If you'd like to verify the downloaded installation, work through :ref:`cli_verification` before proceeding.

        Now, run the installer(``install``) located in the newly created directory(``smithy-install/smithy``).

>         .. important:: The following command requires using ``sudo`` to install the CLI in the default

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        .. important:: The following command typically requires using ``sudo`` to install the CLI in the default
```

        .. important:: The following command requires running powershell with administrator access in order to
            install the CLI into the default location (``<Letter>:\Program Files\Smithy``). Alternatively, you
            may specify your own path, which can mitigate permissions issues when not running as administrator.

        .. code-block:: powershell
            :caption: powershell
            :substitutions:

            PS > (tar -xf smithy-install\|windows-tar| -C smithy-install\smithy) -and
                (smithy-install\smithy\install)

        Follow the installer prompts accordingly to complete the installation.

        After the install completes, you can now run ``smithy --help`` to verify your installation.
        You may also delete all the files downloaded for the installation (``smithy-install\``).

.. _cli_verification:

Verification (Optional)
-----------------------

The Smithy CLI distributables are PGP-signed and hashed before they are released.
You should verify the signatures and hashes of the archives to ensure the validity and integrity
of what you are downloading. You can follow the steps below to do so for your given platform.

> Before proceeding, please make sure you have both the GnuPG utility(``gpg``) and a sha256-checksum

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before proceeding, please make sure you have both the GnuPG utility (``gpg``) and a sha256-checksum
```

utility (``sha256sum``) installed on your system. We'll be using these to perform the verification.

.. note:: This is only applicable to manual installations - Homebrew verifies checksums before install.

.. tab:: MacOS

>     Download the detached signature file(``.asc``) and the sha256-checksum file(``.sha256``) corresponding to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Download the detached signature file (``.asc``) and the sha256-checksum file (``.sha256``) corresponding to
```

    the tarball (which you already downloaded) from the `Smithy GitHub releases`_.

    .. tab:: Manual (x86)

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh
            :substitutions:

            $ curl -L '|release-uri|/|mac-tar|.{asc,sha256}' -o 'smithy-install/|mac-tar|.#1'

        Verify the checksum of the tarball using the `sha256sum` utility.

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh
            :substitutions:

            $ (cd smithy-install && sha256sum -c |mac-tar|.sha256)

        Now, retrieve our `public PGP key`_ from the repository, and import it into your key-chain.

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh
            :substitutions:

>             $ curl -L |smithy-pub-key-uri| -o smithy-install/smithy.asc && gpg --import smithy-install/smithy.asc

Reviewer 2: This one `https://raw.githubusercontent.com/awslabs/smithy/main/smithy.asc` currently returns ~404~ (just noticed that is added in this PR), but having said that, we rotate the key every 3 months, not sure what to do about that if for whatever reason they get a copy that was signed with a key that has been already rotated. Also now we need to make sure that as part of the key rotation process we update it here as well.

Author: Hmmm... good point. Maybe we shouldn't put it in the repo then, and instead include it in the release assets themselves.

            :caption: /bin/sh
            :substitutions:

            $ gpg --verify smithy-install/|linux-tar|.asc smithy-install/|linux-tar|

    .. tab:: Manual (ARM)

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh
            :substitutions:

            $ curl -L '|release-uri|/|linux-arm-tar|.{asc,sha256}' -o 'smithy-install/|linux-arm-tar|.#1'

        Verify the checksum of the tarball using the `sha256sum` utility.

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh
            :substitutions:

            $ (cd smithy-install && sha256sum -c |linux-arm-tar|.sha256)

        Now, retrieve our `public PGP key`_ from the repository, and import it into your key-chain.

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh
            :substitutions:

            $ curl -L |smithy-pub-key-uri| -o smithy-install/smithy.asc && gpg --import smithy-install/smithy.asc

        Finally, after importing the key, verify the signature of the tarball with gpg.

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh
            :substitutions:

            $ gpg --verify smithy-install/|linux-arm-tar|.asc smithy-install/|linux-arm-tar|

.. tab:: Windows

>     Download the detached signature file(``.asc``) and the sha256-checksum file(``.sha256``) corresponding to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Download the detached signature file (``.asc``) and the sha256-checksum file (``.sha256``) corresponding to
```

.. _cli_installation:

.. |release-uri| replace:: https://github.com/awslabs/smithy/releases/download/__smithy_version__
.. |mac-tar| replace:: smithy-cli-darwin-x86_64.tar.gz
.. |mac-arm-tar| replace:: smithy-cli-darwin-aarch64.tar.gz
.. |linux-tar| replace:: smithy-cli-linux-x86_64.tar.gz
.. |linux-arm-tar| replace:: smithy-cli-linux-aarch64.tar.gz
.. |windows-tar| replace:: smithy-cli-windows-x64.tar.gz
.. |verification-note| replace::
        Please refer to :ref:`cli_verification` for instructions
        on how to verify downloaded artifacts.

.. |install-note| replace::
        If you've already installed the CLI and want to update to the
        latest version, you can use the ``--update`` flag.
        You may also choose where to install the CLI - for more information,
        run the installer using the ``--help`` flag.
.. |sudo-note| replace::
        The following command typically requires using ``sudo``
        to install the CLI in the default location (``/usr/local/smithy``).

>         Alternatively, you may set your own install path, which should

Reviewer 3: I might note here that this is done with the `-i` flag on the install script.

Author: There's note about that immediately following this

            $ sudo smithy-install/smithy/install

        .. note::
            |install-note|

        After the install completes, you may run ``smithy --help`` to verify
        your installation. You may also delete all the files downloaded for
        performing the installation (under ``smithy-install/``)

    .. tab:: Manual (ARM)

        First, retrieve the latest smithy installation from the
        `Smithy GitHub releases`_.

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh
            :substitutions:

            $ mkdir -p smithy-install/smithy &&
                curl -L |release-uri|/|mac-arm-tar| -o smithy-install/|mac-arm-tar| &&
                tar xvzf smithy-install/|mac-arm-tar| -C smithy-install/smithy

        .. seealso::
            |verification-note|

        Now, run the installer (``./install``) located in the newly created
        directory (``smithy-install/smithy``).

        .. important::
            |sudo-note|

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh

            $ sudo smithy-install/smithy/install

        .. note::
            |install-note|

        After the install completes, you may run ``smithy --help`` to verify

>         your installation. You may also delete all the files downloaded for

Reviewer 3: Why not just add the correct rm command to the above codeblock to remove the smithy-install/ dir?

                (wget |release-uri|/|windows-tar|.sha256 -outfile smithy-install\|windows-tar|.sha256)

        Compute the actual checksum of the tarball using ``certutil``.

        .. code-block:: powershell
            :caption: powershell
            :substitutions:

            PS > certutil -hashfile smithy-install\|windows-tar|.sha256 SHA256

        Now, print out the expected checksum from the file that you
        downloaded (``.sha256``).

        .. code-block:: powershell
            :caption: powershell
            :substitutions:

            PS > cat smithy-install\|windows-tar|.sha256

        Verify that the output from the two commands matches. There may be a
        file-path appended to the latter command output - you
        may safely ignore that.

        Now, retrieve the public PGP key from the `release`_, and import it into your key-chain.

        .. code-block:: powershell
            :caption: powershell
            :substitutions:

            PS > (wget |release-uri|/smithy.asc -outfile smithy-install\smithy.asc) -and (gpg --import smithy-install\smithy.asc)

        Finally, after importing the key, verify the signature of the

>         tarball with gpg.

Reviewer 3: Do we have any troubleshooting tips for customers? 
For example if they run into:  https://github.com/awslabs/smithy/blob/main/smithy-cli/config/install#L126

Author: I'll add a blurb about it

.. |sudo-note| replace::
        The following command typically requires using ``sudo``
        to install the CLI in the default location (``/usr/local/smithy``).
        Alternatively, you may set your own install path, which should
        mitigate permissions issues when not running with ``sudo``.

============
Installation
============

The Smithy CLI is supported on the following platforms:

- MacOS (x86, ARM)
- Linux (x86, ARM)
- Windows (x64)

Releases of the Smithy CLI can be found on the `Smithy GitHub releases`_ page.

.. tab:: MacOS

    .. tab:: Homebrew

        You can get the CLI via Homebrew by first tapping the official
        `AWS Homebrew Tap`_, and then installing the ``smithy-cli`` formula.

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh

            $ brew tap aws/tap && brew install smithy-cli

        After the install completes, you may run ``smithy --help`` to verify
        your installation.

    .. tab:: Manual (x86)

        First, retrieve the latest smithy installation from the
        `Smithy GitHub releases`_.

        .. code-block:: sh
            :caption: /bin/sh
            :substitutions:

>             $ mkdir -p smithy-install/smithy &&

Reviewer: these lines need a `\` on the end
